.TH "zoxide" "1" "2021-04-12" "zoxide" "zoxide"
.SH NAME
zoxide - a smarter cd command
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zoxide \fISUBCOMMAND [OPTIONS]\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
zoxide is a smarter replacement for your cd command. It keeps track of the
directories you use most frequently, and uses a ranking algorithm to navigate
to the best match.
.SH USAGE
.nf
    \fBz\fR \fIfoo\fR        # cd into highest ranked directory matching foo
    \fBz\fR \fIfoo bar\fR    # cd into highest ranked directory matching foo and bar
.sp
    \fBz\fR \fI~/foo\fR      # z also works like a regular cd command
    \fBz\fR \fIfoo/\fR       # cd into relative path
    \fBz\fR \fI..\fR         # cd one level up
    \fBz\fR \fI-\fR          # cd into previous directory
.sp
    \fBzi\fR \fIfoo\fR       # cd with interactive selection (using fzf)
.fi
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
\fBzoxide-add\fR(1)
Add a new directory to the database, or increment its rank.
.TP
\fBzoxide-import\fR(1)
Import entries from another application.
.TP
\fBzoxide-init\fR(1)
Generate shell configuration.
.TP
\fBzoxide-query\fR(1)
Search for a directory in the database.
.TP
\fBzoxide-remove\fR(1)
Remove a directory from the database.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -h, --help
Print help information.
.TP
.B -V, --version
Print version information.
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
Environment variables must be set before calling \fBzoxide init\fR.
.TP
.B _ZO_DATA_DIR
Specifies the directory in which zoxide should store its database. The default
value varies across OSes:
.TS
tab(|);
l l.
    \fBOS|Path\fR
    Linux/BSD|T{
\fI$XDG_DATA_HOME\fR or \fI$HOME/.local/share\fR
.br
eg. /home/alice/.local/share
T}
    macOS|T{
\fI$HOME/Library/Application Support\fR
.br
eg. /Users/Alice/Library/Application Support
T}
    Windows|T{
\fI{FOLDERID_RoamingAppData}\fR
.br
eg. C:\\Users\\Alice\\AppData\\Roaming
T}
.TE
.TP
.B _ZO_ECHO
When set to \fI1\fR, z will print the matched directory before navigating
to it.
.TP
.B _ZO_EXCLUDE_DIRS
Prevents the specified directories from being added to the database. This is
provided as a list of globs, separated by OS-specific characters:
.TS
tab(|);
l l.
    \fBOS|Separator\fR
    Linux/macOS/BSD|T{
\fI:\fR eg. $HOME:$HOME/private/*
T}
    Windows|\fI;\fR eg. $HOME;$HOME/private/*
.TE
.sp
By default, this is set to \fI"$HOME"\fR. After setting this up, you might need
to use \fBzoxide-remove\fR(1) to remove any existing entries from the database.
.TP
.B _ZO_FZF_OPTS
Custom options to pass to fzf. See \fBman fzf\fR for the list of options.
.TP
.B _ZO_MAXAGE
Configures the aging algorithm, which limits the maximum number of entries in
the database. By default, this is set to \fI10000\fR.
.TP
.B _ZO_RESOLVE_SYMLINKS
When set to \fI1\fR, z will resolve symlinks before adding directories to
the database.
.SH ALGORITHM
.TP
.B AGING
zoxide uses a parameter called \fB_ZO_MAXAGE\fR to limit the number of entries
in the database based on usage patterns. If the total \fBFRECENCY\fR of the
directories in the database exceeds this value, we divide each directory's
score by a factor \fIk\fR such that the new total becomes ~90% of
\fB_ZO_MAXAGE\fR. Thereafter, if the new score of any directory falls below
\fI1\fR, it is removed from the database.
.sp
Theoretically, the maximum number of directories in the database is
\fI4 * _ZO_MAXAGE\fR, although it is lower in practice.
.TP
.B FRECENCY
Each directory in zoxide is given a score, starting with \fI1\fR the first time
it is accessed. Every subsequent access increases the score by \fI1\fR. When a
query is made, we calculate frecency based on the last time the directory was
accessed:
.TS
tab(|);
l l.
    \fBLast access time\fR|\fBFrecency\fR
    Within the last hour|\fIscore * 4\fR
    Within the last day|\fIscore * 2\fR
    Within the last week|\fIscore / 2\fR
    Otherwise|\fIscore / 4\fR
.TE
.TP
.B MATCHING
zoxide uses a simple, predictable algorithm for resolving queries:
.sp
* All matching is case-insensitive.
    \fBzoxide query\fR \fIfoo\fR matches \fI/foo\fR as well as \fI/FOO\fR.
.sp
* All terms must be present (including slashes) within the path, in order.
    \fBzoxide query\fR \fIfo ba\fR matches \fI/foo/bar\fR, but not \fI/bar/foo\fR.
    \fBzoxide query\fR \fIfo / ba\fR matches \fI/foo/bar\fR, but not \fI/foobar\fR.
.sp
* The last component of the last keyword must match the last component of the path.
    \fBzoxide query\fR \fIbar\fR matches \fI/foo/bar\fR, but not \fI/bar/foo\fR.
    \fBzoxide query\fR \fIfoo/bar\fR (last component: \fIbar\fR) matches \fI/foo/bar\fR, but not \fI/foo/bar/baz\fR.
.sp
* The path must exist. Deleted directories are filtered out.
.sp
* Matches are returned in descending order of \fBFRECENCY\fR.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
For any issues, feature requests, or questions, please visit:
.sp
    \fIhttps://github.com/ajeetdsouza/zoxide/issues\fR
.SH AUTHOR
Ajeet D'Souza <\fI98ajeet@gmail.com\fR>
